ADDY: So we've been talking
a bunch about web performance
lately, and the term
first meaningful paint
has come up a bunch.
MATT: I've been avoiding
all those discussions, just
purely from the
standpoint of everyone's
going to have an opinion.
They're always going
to be different.
And it doesn't matter
because everyone's
going to have a
different web app that
needs different things.
ADDY: You realize
your site is then
going to become the
focus of this episode.
MATT: It's because it's so good.
ADDY: Fantastic.
So the Chromium Loading
Performance group
had this really
nice thread where
they walk through
what they thought
first meaningful paint
was, and I thought it would
be good to summarize that.
So there's sort
of three key user
moments people need
to keep an eye on when
it comes to this stuff.
There's is it happening-- so
time to first paint; is it
useful-- so time to
first meaningful paint;
and is usable-- so
time to stable layout.
So let's walk through
all of that stuff
in the context of your site.
So this is your staging site,
which you tell me is fast.
MATT: It's faster.
ADDY: Faster.
We're going to try
this out on GPRS.
And so I've GPRS-ed it up.
Currently in timeline.
And you've got all these
transitions and things
in your site.
So we've clicked on
a link, and we've
got this loading indicator.
It's nice.
Ooh, look at that.
It's nice and--
MATT: So that happens
after the first render.
That's important.
You don't just load up
my site and you get that.
ADDY: So this is your first
paint, in this particular case.
MATT: When you're doing
a navigation, yes.
ADDY: Yeah, you're
doing a navigation.
And then you go straight
for the content right after.
MATT: Yeah, so all
that's happening
is when you go from the
first pages to static render,
it'll animate out.
And before it starts
the animation,
it does a query to get the extra
content for whatever you're
going to go to.
So once it's done
the animation now,
if the query isn't
finished, then
it shows up the spin
as saying, right, we'll
wait until it's done.
Once it's done, loads it
all up and animates in.
ADDY: Cool.
Now, the is it
happening, user moments,
to the time to
first paint, usually
the things that
that would include
are like your splash
screen loading up,
if you have a splash screen,
a loading indicator--
so your site's got a loading
indicator-- basically
any feedback that lets the
user know that navigation
has started in the page.
MATT: So I'm going to
debate that somewhat
because my site only does
the loading indicator when
it's going from one
transition to the next.
The first render, if
you control-refresh it,
is just a static render.
It's important because
it's faster, I think.
ADDY: It's important because
it makes you look better.
MATT: No, so I think
everyone should
be going for a static
render for their first load,
because otherwise
you're sending HTML.
You're sending CSS.
You're sending Java Script just
to do a load, like just showing
a loading spinner on a splash
screen, which, in some cases,
maybe it's unavoidable.
But I think generally, people
should try and avoid it
as much as they can.
ADDY: So the is it
useful moments or time
to first meaningful
paint is usually
focused on paints of
your above-the-fold,
like your body text, your
headline text, maybe a hero
image.
In your case, you're using like
a static server-side render
for this stuff, so it's all
coming down really quickly.
We're going to take
a look at your home
page, which does things
a little bit differently.
So again, you're server-side
rendering your content.
So this is like about
500, 600 milliseconds in.
You've got content
on the screen.
So you've got your first paint.
You've got body
text here as well.
Arguably, this is
first meaningful paint.
But I guess it's
really down to you,
because you don't have headline
text or navigation in place
just yet.
MATT: Yeah, so headline
text and navigation
are using a custom font.
I am pretty much waiting for
the font display parameter
to land, because
basically the font
isn't important in my head.
But I want it to be there.
So it's one of the
things of, well,
I can't manage the caching
or anything like that.
I just basically want to say,
if it's cached in there, use it.
If not, then don't
bother, but I can't yet.
ADDY: I mean, in this
case, just to keep
things super, super
clear, we could say,
OK, well, this is
time to first paint.
And then once you've
actually got your headlines
and everything else in, that's--
MATT: That's meaningful, yeah.
ADDY: In this case,
because, again, you've
got navigation and
stuff in place,
the next things happening
are sort of your CSS,
I guess, asynchronously being
loaded in, in your case?
MATT: Yeah, so I've got the
critical pass here as SO.
The first thing will
have inline CSS.
So it stops the layout from
popping in everything else.
But then I load all
the extra stuff--
so background images
that aren't important
or little bits of UI that are
nice to have but not critical.
ADDY: Cool.
So at this point, I imagine a
user could probably navigate
around your site, right?
MATT: Yeah.
ADDY: So you've got stable
layout and everything
at that point.
Beyond those key user
moments, and again,
one you've got stable
layout, the person
should be able to like
interact with the app
or your navigation, right?
MATT: Yeah.
ADDY: I think was Paul
Irish that actually
enumerated some of these.
So when your page feels
ready to interact with,
it could be the case that
the user agent is completed
with its loading indicator.
You've got your primary
text and images painted.
All of your layout
has stabilized.
Once all that stuff is done,
you're in a fairly good state.
You could consider that there's
stuff after that that applies
to RAIL, the
performance model we've
been talking about in the past.
Is it delightful?
Is there anything else that
needs to load on the page
in order to enrich
that user experience?
But I think, looking at
normal speeds or cable speeds,
your site's actually
doing pretty.
MATT: Like, the way that I
treat a lot of this stuff
is if all you received was
the HTML and nothing else,
the page should be stable,
it should be usable,
and it should paint
everything that
is needed to just be usable.
Because the way that
I see all of this
is if you treat that as just
like the very first thing
that you get is HTML and it
all works, everything past that
is just useful.
So, yeah, that's how
I try and treat it
as much as I can, because I
feel like one way or another,
that's the fastest
I'm going to get.
ADDY: So what we recommend
people to check out
their first meaningful paint
times on Dev 2's Network
Panel, Time Line.
I'm going to see-- so Web
Page Test is another really
great thing to check it out on.
MATT: Because you get the
filmstrip view, which is nice.
ADDY: You get the
filmstrip view,
which is nice, and shows
you the breakdown really
good on sites that have got like
just a lot of activity going
on.
So that's worth checking out.
But, yeah, it's about it
for first meaningful paint.
MATT: Yeah, just see
what you're doing.
[MUSIC PLAYING]